Introduction
============


I
-

Of the seven Icelandic short stories which appear here, the first was
probably written early in the thirteenth century, while the rest all
date from the early twentieth century. It might therefore be supposed
that the earliest of these stories was written in a language more or
less unintelligible to modern Icelanders, and that there was a gap of
many centuries in the literary production of the nation. This, however,
is not the case.

The Norsemen who colonized Iceland in the last quarter of the ninth
century brought with them the language then spoken throughout the whole
of Scandinavia. This ancestor of the modern Scandinavian tongues has
been preserved in Iceland so little changed that every Icelander still
understands, without the aid of explanatory commentaries, the oldest
preserved prose written in their country 850 years ago. The principal
reasons for this were probably limited communications between Iceland
and other countries, frequent migrations inside the island, and, not
least important, a long and uninterrupted literary tradition. As a
consequence, Icelandic has not developed any dialects in the ordinary
sense.

It is to their language and literature, as well as to the island
separateness of their country, that the 175 thousand inhabitants of this
North-Atlantic state of a little more than a hundred thousand square
kilometres owe their existence as an independent and separate nation.

The Icelanders established a democratic legislative assembly, the
Althingi (*Alþingi*) in 930 A.D., and in the year 1000 embraced
Christianity. Hence there soon arose the necessity of writing down the
law and translations of sacred works. Such matter, along with historical
knowledge, may well have constituted the earliest writings in Icelandic,
probably dating as far back as the eleventh century, while the oldest
preserved texts were composed early in the twelfth century. This was the
beginning of the so-called saga-writing. The important thing was that
most of what was written down was in the vernacular, Latin being used
but sparingly. Thus a literary style was evolved which soon reached a
high standard. This style, so forceful in its perspicuity, was
effectively simple, yet rich in the variety of its classical structure.

There were different categories of sagas. Among the most important were
the sagas of the Norwegian kings and the family sagas. The latter tell
us about the first generations of native Icelanders. They are all
anonymous and the majority of them were written in the thirteenth
century. Most of them contain a more or less historical core. Above all,
however, they are fine literature, at times realistic, whose excellence
is clearly seen in their descriptions of events and character, their
dialogue and structure. Most of them are in fact in the nature of
historical novels. The Viking view of life pervading them is
characteristically heroic, but with frequent traces of the influence of
Christian writing.

Besides these there were short stories (*þaettir*) about Icelanders, of
which `The Story of Audunn and the Bear` (`Auðunar þáttr vestfirzka`) is
one of the best known.[*]_

These may be regarded as a preliminary stage in the development of the
longer family saga, simpler, yet having essentially the same
characteristics. Both types then continued to be written side by side.
Although the geographical isolation of the country was stated above as
one of the reasons for the preservation of the language, too great a
stress should not be laid on this factor, especially not during the
early centuries of the settlement. The Icelanders were great and active
navigators who discovered Greenland (shortly after 980) and North
America (Leifr Eiriksson, about 1000). Thus `The Story of Audunn and the
Bear` recounts travels to Greenland, Norway, Denmark and Italy. It was
then fashionable for young Icelanders to go abroad and spend some time
at the courts of the Norwegian kings, where the skalds recited poems of
praise dedicated to the king. In this story the occasion of the voyage
is a less common one, the bringing of a polar bear as a gift to the
Danish king. In several other Icelandic stories, and in some of other
countries, we read of such gifts, and of how European potentates prized
these rare creatures from Greenland.

In Scandinavia, Germany, and elsewhere, there have been legends similar
to the story of Audunn, where a man, after having been to the Norwegian
king with a tame bear, decides to present it to the king of Denmark.
However, we know of no earlier source for this motif than the story of
Audunn. Whatever its value as historical fact, it could well be the
model to which the other versions might be traced. This story is
preserved in the `Morkinskinna`, an Icelandic manuscript written in the
second half of the thirteenth century, as well as in several later
manuscripts.[*]_ The story had probably been written down by 1220, if
not earlier. It is given a historical background in so far as it is set
in the time of Haraldr the Hard-ruler, King of Norway (1046--66), and
Sveinn Úlfsson, King of Denmark (1047--76), when the two countries were
at war (c. 1062--64). Both monarchs are depicted as generous,
magnanimous men, but Audunn was shrewd enough to see which would give
the greater reward for his precious bear. For all his generosity, King
Haraldr was known to be ruthless and grasping. What the writer had in
mind may have been a character-comparison of the two kings and the
description of 'one of the luckiest of men', about whom the translator,
G. Turville-Petre says: 'Audunn himself, in spite of his shrewd and
purposeful character, is shown as a pious man, thoughtful of salvation,
and richly endowed with human qualities, affection for his patron and
especially for his mother. The story is an optimistic one, suggesting
that good luck may attend those who have good morals.'


II
--

The Icelanders have never waged war against any nation. But in the
thirteenth century they were engaged in a civil war which ended in their
submitting to the authority of the Norwegian king in the sixties (this
authority was transferred to the King of the Danes in 1380). It is
interesting that, during the next few decades after this capitulation,
saga-writing seems to reach a climax as an art, in family sagas like
Njáls saga, 'one of the great prose works of the world' (W. P. Ker). It
is as if the dangers of civil war and the experiences gained in times of
surrender had created in the authors a kind of inner tension---as if
their maturity had found full expression in the security of peace.
However, with the first generation born in Iceland in subjection, the
decline of saga-writing seems to begin. This can hardly be a mere
coincidence. On the contrary it was brought about by a number of
different factors.

Subsequently, in the fourteenth century, saga-writing becomes for the
most part extinct. From c. 1400--1800 there is hardly any prose fiction
at all. Hence the fact that several centuries remain unrepresented in
this work (though the gap might have been reduced to four or five
centuries had literary-historical considerations alone been allowed to
influence the present selection).

But the sagas continued to be copied and read. After the setting up of
the first printing press (c. 1530), and after the Reformation (c. 1550),
religious literature grew much in bulk, both translations (that of the
Bible was printed in 1584) and original works, and a new kind of
historical writing came into being. Side by side with scholars, we have
self-educated commoners who wrote both prose and, especially, poetry.

In Iceland, being a 'poet' has never been considered out of the
ordinary. On the contrary, a person unable to make up a verse or two
would almost be considered exceptional. Yet, this requires considerable
skill as the Icelanders are the only nation that has preserved the
ancient common Germanic alliteration (found in all Germanic poetry till
late medieval times). We frequently find this device accompanied by
highly complicated rhyme schemes. Despite this rather rigid form,
restrictive perhaps, yet disciplinary in its effect, exquisite poetry
has nevertheless been produced. This poetry, however, is not within the
scope of this introduction. Suffice it to say that from what exists of
their verse it is clear that poets have been active at all times since
the colonization of the country. It is this uninterrupted flow of poetry
that above all has helped to preserve the language and the continuity of
the literary tradition.

During the centuries we have been discussing---especially, however, the
seventeenth---the Icelanders probably wrote more verse than any other
nation has ever done---ranging in quality, to be sure, from the lowest
to the highest. When, in the sixteenth century, they had got paper to
take the place of the more expensive parchment, they could universally
indulge in copying old literature and writing new, an opportunity which
they certainly made use of. It was their only luxury---and, at the same
time, a vital need.

We have said that the Icelanders had never waged war against any other
people. But they have had to struggle against foreign rulers, and
against hardships caused by the nature of their country. After the
Reformation, the intervention of the Crown greatly increased, and, at
the same time, its revenues from the country. A Crown monopoly of all
trade was imposed (in 1602). Nature joined forces with mismanagement by
the authorities; on the seas surrounding the island pack-ice frequently
became a menace to shipping, and there also occurred unusually long and
vicious series of volcanic eruptions. These culminated in the late
eighteenth century (1783), when the world's most extensive lava fields
of historical times were formed, and the mist from the eruption was
carried all over Europe and far into the continent of Asia. Directly or
indirectly as a consequence of this eruption, the greater part of the
live-stock, and a fifth of the human population of the country perished.

Still the people continued to tell stories and to compose poems. No
doubt the Icelanders have thus wasted on poetical fantasies and
visionary daydreams much of the energy that they might otherwise have
used in life's real battle. But the greyness of commonplace existence
became more bearable when they listened to tales of the heroic deeds of
the past. In the evening, the living-room (*baðstofa*), built of turf
and stone, became a little more cheerful, and hunger was forgotten,
while a member of the household read, or sang, about far-away knights
and heroes, and the banquets they gave in splendid halls. In their
imagination people thus tended to make their environment seem larger,
and better, than life, as did Hrolfur with his fishing-boat in the story
`When I was on the Frigate`.


III
---

About 1800, things began to improve. The monopoly of trade, which had
been relaxed in 1787, was finally abolished in 1854. In the year 1874
Iceland got self-government in its internal affairs, and in 1904 its
first minister of state with residence in the country. It became a
sovereign kingdom in union with Denmark in 1918, and an independent
republic in 1944.

The climate of the country has improved during the last hundred and
fifty years, though there were a number of severe years in the eighteen
eighties. It was at this time that emigration to the North-American
Continent reached a peak, especially to Canada, where one of the
settlements came to be called New Iceland---the title given to the last
story in this book. Many of these emigrants suffered great hardships,
and, as the story tells, several of them became disillusioned with the
land of promise. Their descendants, however, have on the whole done well
in the New World.

Until recently, the Icelanders were almost entirely a nation of farmers,
and the majority of the stories in this collection contain sketches of
country life. A certain amount of perseverance and even obstinacy was
needed for a farmer's life on an island skirting the Arctic Circle (`The
Old Hay`). Only about a quarter of the country is fit for human
habitation, mainly the districts along the coast. The uplands, for the
most part made up of mountains, glaciers, sand-deserts, and lava, are
often awe-inspiring in their grandeur.

Nevertheless it would be wrong to exaggerate the severity of the land.
In many places the soil is fertile, as is often the case in volcanic
countries, and---thanks to the Gulf Stream, which flows up to the shores
of the island---the climate is a good deal more temperate than one might
suppose (the average annual temperatures in Reykjavík are 4--5°
Centigrade).

Besides, the surrounding sea makes up for the barrenness of the country
by having some of the richest fishing banks in the world. Hence, in
addition to being farmers, the Icelanders have always been fishermen who
brought means of sustenance from the sea---usually in primitive open
boats like those described in `When I was on the Frigate` and `Father
and Son`. In the late nineteenth century decked vessels came into use
besides the open boats, succeeded by steam trawlers at the beginning of
the present century. For the last few decades, the Icelanders have been
employing a modern fishing fleet, and, at the time of writing, fishery
products constitute more than ninety per cent of the country's exports.

With the growth of the fisheries and commerce there began to spring up
towards the end of the nineteenth century a number of trading villages
in different parts of the country. Reykjavík, the only municipality of
fairly long standing and by far the biggest one, had at the turn of the
present century a population of only between six and seven
thousand---now about eleven times that number. We catch glimpses of
these small trading stations at the beginning of the twentieth century
in `A Dry Spell` and `Father and Son`.

Nowadays, four fifths of the population live in villages and
townships---where some light industry has sprung up---and, in Reykjavík
alone, more than two fifths of the population are concentrated.

In the last fifty years, the occupations of the people and their culture
have changed from being in many respects medieval, and have assumed
modern forms. The earlier turfbuilt farmhouses have now been replaced by
comfortable concrete buildings which get their electricity from a source
of water power virtually inexhaustible. Many of these---e.g. the
majority of houses in Reykjavík---are heated by water from hot springs,
so that the purity of the northern air is seldom spoilt by smoke from
coal-fires. The reliable Icelandic pony---so dear to the farmer in `New
Iceland`, and for long known as 'a man's best friend'---has now for the
most part come to serve the well-to-do who can afford to use it for
their joy-rides, its place in farmwork being taken by modern
agricultural machinery. As a means of travel it has been replaced by a
host of motorcars, and by aeroplanes, which in Iceland are as commonly
used in going from one part of the country to another as railway trains
in other countries. In fact, it has not been found feasible to build
railways in Iceland. Besides this, a large number of airliners make
daily use of Icelandic airfields on transatlantic flights. What with
most other nations has been a slow and gradual process lasting several
centuries, has in Iceland come about in more or less a revolutionary
way. It is therefore not to be wondered at that there should have been a
certain instability in the development of the urban and economic life of
the country. In this field, however, there appear to be signs of
consolidation.

Foreigners who come to this country in search of the old saga-island are
sometimes a little disappointed at finding here, in place of
saga-tellers and bards, a modern community, with its own university, a
national theatre, and a symphony orchestra. Be this as it may,
literature still holds first place among the arts and cultures. A
collection of books is indeed considered as essential a part of a home
as the furniture itself. For such visitors, there may be some
consolation in the fact that in some places they may have quite a job in
spotting the grocer's among the bookshops.


IV
--

In literature there had, especially in poetry, been a continuity from
the very beginnings. Yet, in the field also, the early nineteenth
century saw the dawn of a new age. The Romantic Movement was here, as
elsewhere, accompanied by a national awakening, so that literature
became the herald and the principal motive force of social improvement.
There was at the same time a new drive for an increased beauty of
language and refinement of style, where the classical, cultivated,
literary language and the living speech of the time merged. With
Romanticism there also emerged poets of so great merit that only a few
such had come forward since the end of the saga period. But
henceforward---let's take as our point of departure the second quarter
of the nineteenth century---each generation in the country has indeed
produced some outstanding literary works, comparable in quality with the
accomplishments of the ancient classical Edda and saga periods.

During this new golden age, several literary tendencies and genres may
be observed. But Romanticism remained the most lasting and potent
literary force for about a century. However, one of the characteristics
of the Icelandic literature of later ages is the infrequent
manifestation of literary trends in their purest and most extreme forms.
Here the stabilizing and moderating influence of the ancient sagas has,
without doubt, been at work. In most cases this middle course may be
said to have been beneficial to the literature.

But the saga-literature may also well have had a restraining influence
on later authors in so far as it set a difficult standard to be
emulated. It is probably here that the principal explanation of the late
re-emergence of prose fiction is to be sought. It was not until about
the middle of the nineteenth century that modern short stories, novels
and plays began to be written on anything like a scale worthy of note.
The earliest of these were romantic in spirit, though most of them had a
realistic tinge. With Realism, the short story came into its own in the
eighties and nineties of the last century. This trend came like a fresh
current to take its place side by side with Romanticism, without,
however, ousting it from the literary scene. But owing to the realistic
technique and the tragic endings of much in the ancient
literature---Eddaic poetry and sagas alike---Realism was never the novel
force it generally was felt to be elsewhere. Still, it brought social
criticism into our literature. This was introduced through the activity
of young literary-minded students who, while studying at the University
of Copenhagen, had become full of enthusiasm for Georg Brandes and his
school.

One of these young men was Einar H. Kvaran (1859--1938), a clergyman's
son from the North, who, after beginning as a student of politics, soon
turned his attention to literature and journalism. He became editor of
Icelandic newspapers in Canada (1885--95), and, later, in Iceland,
mainly in Reykjavík. His chief preoccupation, however, became the
composition of short stories and novels, and besides these he also wrote
some plays and poetry. The delicacy and the religious bent of his nature
could not for long remain the soil for the satirical asperity and
materialism of the realist school, though his art was always marked by
its technique. As he advanced in years, brotherhood and forgiveness
became an evergrowing element in his idealism, and he became the first
bearer of the spiritualist message in this country. With his stories he
had a humanizing influence on his times, especially in the education of
children, and in the field of culture he remained actively interested
right up to a ripe old age. If somewhat lacking in creative fervour and
colourful raciness of style, he made up for it by the abundance of his
intelligence, his humanity and culture.

He wrote `A Dry Spell` (`Þurrkur`) at the beginning of the present
century, when he had disengaged himself from the strongest influence of
Realism, but before moral preaching and the belief in the life hereafter
had become the leading elements in his stories. He had then, for a few
years, been living in the north-country town of Akureyri, which
obviously provides the model for the setting of the story. It was first
printed in the 1905 issue of the periodical `Skírnir`.

In addition to the travelled, academic realists, there appeared a group
of self-educated popular writers, some of whom had come into direct
contact with this foreign school. They were farmers, even in the more
remote country districts, who had read the latest Scandinavian
literature in the original, and who wrote stories containing radical
social satire. Guðmundur Friðjónsson, for instance, had begun his career
in this way. In many of these authors, however, we find rather a sort of
native realism, where there is not necessarily a question of the
influence of any particular literary tendency. Their works sprang out of
the native environment of the authors, whose vision, despite a limited
horizon, was often vivid. They convey true impressions of real life.

Of this kind are most of the works of Guðmundur Friðjónsson
(1869--1944), a radical who later turned to conservatism---and the best
works of Jón Trausti (1873--1918). These, who had their debut as writers
about the turn of the century, are the authors of the next two stories
in our collection. Both were North-countrymen. The former, a farmer's
son from a district enjoying a high standard of culture, himself settled
down as a farmer in his native locality in order to earn a living for
his large family. In his youth he had attended a secondary school in the
neighbourhood for a couple of winters, but he never had his experiences
enriched by foreign travel and was during the whole of his life anchored
to his native region. Jón Trausti, the son of a farm labourer and his
wife, who had been born on one of the northernmost farms in Iceland in a
barren and outlying district, was brought up in dire poverty. From an
early age he had had to fend for himself as a farmhand and fisherman,
finally settling in Reykjavík as a printer. Apart from his
apprenticeship with the printers, he never went to any sort of school
(school education was first made compulsory by law in Iceland in 1907);
but on two occasions he had travelled abroad.

These energetic persons became widely read, especially in Icelandic
literature, and wrote extensively under difficult circumstances---in
fact all the modern authors represented in the present book may be said
to have been prolific as writers. Guðmundur Friðjónsson was equally
versatile as a writer of short stories and poems. He has a rich command
of imagery and diction, and his style, at times a little pompous, is
often powerful though slightly archaic in flavour. The ancient heroic
literature doubtless fostered his manly ideas, which, however, sprang
from his own experience in life. One must, he felt, be hard on oneself,
and on one's guard against the vanity of newfangled ideas and against
the enervating effect of civilization. It is in the nature of things
that with this farmer and father of a family of twelve, assiduity,
prudence, and self-discipline should be among the highest virtues. This
is notably apparent in `The Old Hay` (`Gamla heyið`), which he wrote in
1909, and which was published in `Tólf sögur` (`Twelve stories`) in
1915.

Jón Trausti (pseudonym of Guðmundur Magnússon) is best known as the
author of novels and short stories on contemporary and historical
themes, but he also wrote plays and poems. He was endowed with fertile
creative powers and the ability to draw vivid sketches of environment
and character. At times, however, he lacks restraint, especially in his
longer novels. Still, his principal work, `The Mountain Cot`
(`Heiðarbýlið`)---one of the longest cycles in Icelandic fiction---is
his greatest. The little outlying mountain cot becomes a separate world
in its own right, a coign of vantage affording a clear view of the
surrounding countryside where we get profound insight into human nature.
Like the bulk of his best work, this novel has a foundation in his own
experiences. In reading the story by him included in this volume, the
reader may find it helpful to bear in mind Trausti's early life as a
fisherman. What he attempts to show us there is a kind of inner
reality---an offset to reality. `When I was on the Frigate` (`Þegar eg
var á fregátunni`) first published in `Skírnir` for 1910.

Jón Trausti and Einar H. Kvaran---who between them form an interesting
contrast---were the most prolific novelists at the beginning of the
present century. By that time prose was becoming an increasingly
important part of Icelandic literature. It would be more or less true to
say that in the first thirty years of the century it had gained an equal
footing with poetry. For the last thirty years, however, prose has taken
first place, after poetry had constituted the backbone of Icelandic
literature for six hundred years, or since the end of saga-writing.

But there were several writers who felt that the small reading public at
home in Iceland gave them too little scope. So they emigrated, mostly to
Denmark, and in the early decades of the century began to write in
foreign languages, though the majority continued simultaneously to write
in the vernacular. Pioneers in this field were the dramatist Johann
Sigurjónsson (1880--1919), and the novelist Gunnar Gunnarsson (b. 1889).
Both of these wrote in Danish as well as in Icelandic. Early in the
second decade of the century three of this overseas group produced works
that were accorded immediate acclaim, and which have since become
classics, being widely translated into foreign languages. These were
`Eyvind of the Hills` (`Fjalla-Eyvindur`) by Johann Sigurjonsson; `The
Borg Family` (`Borgaraettin`, in English `Guest the One-eyed`) by Gunnar
Gunnarsson; and `Nonni, Erlebnisse eines jungen Isländers`, the first of
the famous children's books by the Jesuit monk Jón Sveinsson (Jon
Svensson, 1857--1944). With these works modern Icelandic literature won
for the first time a place for itself among the living contemporary
literatures of the world. Since then, Iceland's contribution has been
steady, not only in the works of those who wrote in foreign languages,
but equally---and during the last couple of decades exclusively---in
vernacular writing. In fact, with the return to his native country of
Gunnar Gunnarsson in 1939, the vogue of writing in foreign languages
virtually came to an end.

On his arrival in Iceland Gunnarsson had settled in his native
east-country district though he afterwards moved to Reykjavík, where he
now lives. Indeed he possesses many of the best qualities of the
gentleman-farmer---firmness, tenacity of purpose, and a craving for
freedom in his domain---combined with a writer's imaginative and
narrative powers and understanding of humanity. He often describes human
determination and man's struggle with destiny, especially in his
historical novels, which are set in most periods of Icelandic history.
More moving, perhaps, are his novels on contemporary themes. The
greatest among these is the cycle `The Church on the Mountain`
(`Fjallkirkjan`; of the five novels making up this sequence, three have
been translated into English under two titles, `Ships in the Sky` and
`The Night and the Dream`). This is one of the major works of Icelandic
literature---containing a fascinating world of fancy, invention, and
reality. It is the story of the development of a writer who leaves home
in order to seek the world. One of the best known stories in all
Icelandic literature is his masterly short novel `Advent` or `The Good
Shepherd` (`Aðventa`).---`Father and Son` (`Feðgarnir`) was first
published in the periodical `Eimreiðin` in 1916. The present version,
with slight changes, is that found in the author's collected works, `Rit
XI`, 1951.

Most Icelandic writers have, of course, written in the vernacular only,
in spite of longer or shorter stay abroad. This applies to the last two
authors represented here, both of whom appeared on the literary scene
about 1920.

Guðmundur G. Hagalín (b. 1898) comes from the sea-girt Western Fiords,
where he was a fisherman before attending secondary school. Later, he
lectured on Iceland in Norway for a few years (1924--27), and is now a
superintendent of public libraries. His home is in the neighbourhood of
Reykjavík. In his novels, and more particularly in his short stories, he
is at his best in his portrayals of the simple sturdy seamen and
countryfolk of his native region, which are often refreshingly arch in
manner. Hagalín, who is a talented narrator, frequently succeeds in
catching the living speech and characteristic mode of expression of his
characters. `The Fox Skin` (`Tófuskinnið`) first appeared in 1923, in
one of his collections of short stories (`Strandbúar`). He has also been
successful as a recorder and editor of the biographies of greatly
different people, based on first-hand accounts of their own lives. He is
at present continuing with the writing of his autobiography---a long and
interesting work.

Halldór Kiljan Laxness was born in 1902 in Reykjavík. Shortly afterwards
his parents established themselves on a farm in the neighbourhood where
he was brought up, and where he has now built himself a home. He is a
patriot and, at the same time, a cosmopolitan who has probably travelled
more extensively abroad than any other of his fellow-countrymen. After
becoming a Catholic at the age of twenty, he spent a year in monasteries
abroad, but had already begun to waver in his Catholicism when he first
visited America, where he stayed from 1927 to 1930. During those years
he became more and more radical in his social beliefs. Already in his
first year there, he wrote the short story `New Iceland` (`Nýja
Ísland`), which was immediately published in `Heimskringla`, an
Icelandic weekly in Winnipeg. The story thus dates from an early period,
when his art was in process of great development.

Indeed, the nineteen twenties saw important changes in our literature.
The last of the great nineteenth century poets were vanishing from the
literary scene, their places being taken by others, whose poetry, though
hardly as profound and lofty in conception, was more lyrical and simple
in manner, with greater delicacy and refinement of form. Especially in
the prose-writing of the period, there were signs of flourishing growth.
Gunnar Gunnarsson wrote `The Church on the Mountain`, and Laxness was
becoming known. In the early thirties he appears as a fully mature
writer in `Salka Valka`, a political love story from a fishing village,
and `Independent People` (`Sjálfstætt fólk`), a heroic novel about the
stubbornness and the lot of the Icelandic mountain farmer, both of which
have appeared in English translations. Laxness has devoted less
attention to the writing of plays and poetry than novels and short
stories. Two among his greatest works are the novel sequences `The Light
of the World` (`Heimsljós`)---about a poet-genius who never reaches
maturity---, and `The Bell of Iceland` (`Íslandsklukkan`), a historical
novel describing a political, cultural and human struggle. On the whole,
the subject-matter of his stories is extremely varied, equally as
regards time, place and human types. However, the greatest variety will
probably be found in his style, which he constantly adapts to suit the
subject. Behind all this lies a fertile creativeness which rarely leaves
the reader untouched. No matter where in the wide world his stories may
be set, they always stand in some relation to his people---though, at
the same time, he usually succeeds in endowing them with universal
values shared by common humanity. To achieve this has from early on been
Laxness' aim; thus the first printed version of `New Iceland` contains
the sub-heading: 'An international proletarian story.'

When this introduction was being written, a new novel by him, `Heaven
Reclaimed` (`Paradísarheimt`) was published (1960), which, like his
early short story, is set partly in America---this time among the
Icelandic Mormons of Utah. Here, the man who goes out across half the
world in quest of the millennium is in the end led back to his origins.

Laxness was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1955.

The University of Iceland,
Reykjavík.

*Steingrímur J. Þorsteinsson.*


.. [*] In this edition, the specially-Icelandic consonants *þ* and *ð*
       are printed as *th* and *d* respectively, and the superstressed
       vowels *á*, *í*, *ó*, and *ú*, are given without the acute
       accent, when they occur in proper names in the stories, e.g.
       *Þórður*: *Thordur*.

.. [*] The most valuable edition of `The Story of Adunn and the Bear` is
       that of Guðni Jónsson in the series `Íslenzk fornrit` (vol. VI,
       Reykjavík 1943). The text of this edition is followed in the
       present translation, except in a few cases where reference has
       been made to the texts of `Fornmannasögur` VI, Copenhagen 1831,
       and `Flateyjarbók` III, Oslo 1868.
